You are in in your own distinctive way
very online
and speaking some of the language of
that world. I just wrote down a few.
Lumberjack dykes, small-breasted
biddies, gaytard. Yes.
Yeah, do you want me to defend it?
Evangelical pastor Douglas Wilson
doesn't seem to mind if you call him a
theocrat. I'd like to see the nation be
a Christian nation. I'd like to see the
world be a Christian world. He wants a
society that acknowledges Jesus'
authority over politics.
>> Marriage and the family were created by
God, by the supreme being, not by the
Supreme Court. And patriarchal authority
in the home. Wives look up to their
husbands as the church does to Christ.
Is he just being hyped by his critics as
a Trump era villain? Doug Wilson and his
church admitted that one of their goals
is to infiltrate the Trump
administration because they want
Christian dominion of the world. I see
it as a as a a dominionist cult. Or does
American Christianity's future really
lie with a recovery of its zealous
Puritan past? Don't play with fire, but
burn whatever bridges you need to burn.
Doug Wilson, welcome to Interesting
Times. Thanks for having me.
So, we're going to try and talk about
some pretty meaty things.
Obviously, your vision for America as a
Christian nation.
But, I wanted to start with
a conversation about some of your
theological beliefs.
>> Okay. Because I thought it would be
helpful to ground the audience.
>> Frame frame a little frame. Frame the
conversation for when we turn to
politics. And also, I'm just interested.
Okay. So, let's start off with a pretty
basic question.
>> All right. We are both Christians.
Right. I'm a Roman Catholic.
Uh you are a evangelical Protestant, but
specifically a reformed evangelical.
>> Right. Presbyterian.
>> Presbyterian, Calvinist.
>> Yeah. Calvinist, all that. All that. All
that, right? So, our traditions have had
some pretty sharp differences in the
past. Like wars of religion.
>> Right. That's That's happened.
>> That's happened. And you know, the
people involved in those conflicts
thought that there were really serious
eternal stakes involved, right? That
um
respectively, Catholics and Protestants
were leading people into serious error,
putting people at risk of damnation.
Right. So, simple question. Do you think
I'm going to hell?
That's not my job. I know. I It's It's
not your job to to know.
>> That's true. So, um let me put the the
reframe the question and then answer it
straight up. Um
I believe that there are many Roman
Catholics who are saved and going to
heaven. So, uh I also believe there are
many Presbyterians who aren't. So, the
the last day where the Lord separates
wheat from tares, sheep from goats, is
not going to be
there's not going to be denominational
lines. Right. So, I believe that
salvation is a gift of God um
and as the gift of God, he bestows it on
whom he will. And when he does that, uh
the fruit of the spirit is the result.
So, I there are Roman Catholics with
whom I can fellowship
uh with as brothers in Christ, and there
are people who who are just in an alien
world from from me. So, that doesn't
answer the question about you and me
because we just met, all right? But
That's fair.
>> But But there's But there's
>> We'll I'll ask it again
at the end of the interview.
>> Oh, yeah. Def- definitely you're going
to heaven.
So, really God is the one who makes that
determination. If we're to be saved,
he's going to have to do all the saving.
So, the illustration I like to give is
if
you died and went up to heaven and St.
Peter had a
desk there with a justification by faith
alone test, gave you a pencil and said,
"Here take the Take the test and we'll
You don't need to get a hundred on the
test and we'll let you into heaven."
If you the you the way you passed the
test is you look at the paid test and
you look at the pencil and then you give
the pencil back.
And he says, "Very good."
It's not test-taking. It's not works of
the law. And it's not doctrinal works of
the law Right.
>> either.
So, what is it? It's Christ.
Christ is our salvation. Abandon
yourself. Drop it. Let go of yourself.
Turn away from sin and self and all the
me. Right. And look to Christ.
>> But when you do that, what you're really
saying, I think, right, isn't it
all you can advise people to do is to
try and come to a deeper awareness of
something that
God has decided for them. Correct.
Correct. Now, um but God's really When
God decides things like that, God is not
a muscle-bound Zeus, like a Calvinist
Zeus in the upper reaches of the cosmos
making people do stuff. A Calvinist Zeus
would be really That would be
problematic. He'd be a bully. And uh so,
when God determines who's saved and who
not and God determines who turns left
and who turns right,
in him we live and move and have our
being. And so, God can do that without
turning us into puppets. And that's the
the the charge uh against Calvinists is
that they have a muscle-bound Zeus who's
Right. pulling the puppet puppet
strings, but I don't think of that that
way at all.
>> Well, that's that's one charge against
Calvinists, right? Um
but a different one would be that
you know,
that you have a God who is creating
human beings as
characters in a larger story that he's
telling, which is
personally believe,
>> Yeah. right? But who is also creating
people who will do terrible things,
creating people who will be damned. Yes.
>> Right? And so, the crit- the common
critique against Calvinism is doesn't
this God, whether or not he's a
nightclub bouncer, Zeus, or anything
like that, right? But
isn't this a pretty harsh thing to do,
to sit down and create characters in a
story
who you know are going to go to hell?
Correct. Um I would say not harsh, but
it's certainly hard. Right? It's um
Paul says in Romans, "Behold the
kindness and severity of God."
God is is The God of the Bible is no
buttercup.
So, when God creates the story in which
villains are villains and bad people are
bad people, he can do that without
sullying his hands. The way I preach it
is that God draws straight with crooked
lines.
Uh God is so powerful that he can create
a narrative, a story in which creatures
rebel against him and they are
responsible for that rebellion and God
is in complete control of the whole
thing. But why not pull them back? Uh
Just just just to take Sure. just to
take an an alternative theory, right? An
alternative Christian theory would say
there are still going to be
opportunities for repentance and moments
when grace is offered.
>> Right. And if they refuse grace, then
yes, God is, as you say, severe and
allows them to make that refusal Right.
>> and maybe be damned eternally because of
it, but there is an opportunity, a path
that is open for every human being, even
the people who might end up in hell.
>> So,
we live in one hell of a screwed up
world. All right? There There are
horrendous things going on right this
second, right this minute, all over the
globe. Uh there are kids being abused,
there are people being trafficked, there
are wars erupting, there are rapes,
there are murders, you know.
This world is a screwed up planet. And a
reasonable sophomore would say, "And who
put it here?"
Who's responsible for all this? I mean,
ultimately, fundamentally, who did this?
Well, the answer is God.
Basically, there's no
slipping off the point. All orthodox
Christians are stuck with the problem of
evil.
Orthodox and the only people who've the
people who uh feel the force of that and
try to get out of it are the openness
process theologians, the openness of God
people where they say God's not in
control, really. So, that that's how we
justify him. He's not in control. But
every orthodox Christian believes that
God's in control and decided to create
the world with all of its
gunk anyway. And so, at some level,
God's responsible. The thing that
distinguishes the Calvinist is that the
Calvinist acknowledges that and speaks
right into the microphone and says,
"Yes, God is involved."
So, talk about the political project
>> Right.
>> that comes out of this. And you have,
you know, the phrase Christian
nationalism gets thrown around a lot
these days. And you have been willing to
take full ownership of the phrase.
>> Correct. I prefer that phrase to what I
usually get called. Which is a theocrat.
>> Yeah. And we'll get to that. But first,
give me just your definition of
Christian nationalism. Uh Christian
nationalism is the conviction that
secularism is a failed experiment, that
societies require a transcendent
grounding in order to be able to
function at all. And as a Christian, I
believe that that transcendent ground
should be the living God and not an
idol.
That would be my
short form definition of Christian
nationalism. Even shorter would be
Christian nationalism is the conviction
that we should stop making God angry.
And so that's the first purpose of your
political project to
for America to stop making God angry.
Yes. And most people think that when
they are confronted with that project
that we have is they think that we want
to get our tentacles into everything and
start controlling everything. I actually
think we need limited government where
the government should be significantly
smaller than it is and we need to
curtail a lot of the busybodiness that
we we have and so that's why I would
call myself a theocratic libertarian.
There is a true libertarian element in
this and and yet the transcendent
grounding for what we're talking about
means that we acknowledge the authority
of God. And we have racked up quite a
body count of um
awful crimes
and I believe the only way out is for us
to repent and turn to Christ. So and and
repentance and turning to Christ would
be things like no more pride parades, no
more
drag queen story hours, no more abortion
on demand, no more legalized same-sex
unions, no you know, all of that done.
That's that's the repentance part.
By law. By yeah, by law. By law.
Um but I've been ministering
uh preaching for coming up on 50 years
and when I first began ministering
homosexuality was against homosexual
behavior was against the law and that
was not a totalitarian hellhole. That
was not the Handmaid's Tale. It was a
free and prosperous
country that I was grateful to God to be
growing up in um and yet we had as a
society dis Free free except for people
who were arrested for sodomy. Um Right.
It was not a free society for them.
Yeah. They were also not free for
forgers and burglars and bank robbers
and not free for them either. Right.
>> Right. So but every society has a set of
standards and to if you don't have laws
at all you don't have a society.
And so it's it's this is
>> is true. I don't think America is in
danger of not having laws, right?
Correct.
>> So so the but the question the question
is how far
those laws go.
>> Yeah, they Right. I mean there there
sort of But it's by what standard?
>> Well, it's by what standard but also how
far, right? So I've I've I've read a lot
of your work. I you know, I've I've
followed your public I followed your
public ministry and it seems to me
um you can take this as a critique or
not but it seems like you move back and
forth between a couple of different
modes
of engagement on politics. In one mode
you make arguments that are I think
pretty much in alignment with a kind of
mainstream religious conservatism which
basically say
that the United States for most of its
history
did not have an established church but
had a kind of soft cultural consensus
around Christianity originally
Protestant Christianity A soft
establishment
>> a soft a soft establishment
um and that this broke down in the 1950s
and 1960s. There were Supreme Court
rulings outlawing school prayer these
kinds of things and this then led to
things like Roe v. Wade
um that legalized abortion and therefore
the goal of religious conservatives
should be to
um do things like overturn Roe Yeah.
potentially ban abortion, allow for
crosses on town greens
>> Yeah. um prayer in some public schools
these these kind of things. Now these
are obviously views that many many
people disagree with. Many some people
would call theocratic but I would say
those are views that are sort of you
know, within the mainstream of Yeah.
American politics. That's true. Right.
But then but then there is another mode,
right? Where you know
that is the mode of basically saying,
well, you know, we need to go a bit
further. Right? And um it wasn't
actually enough for the United States to
have to allow prayer in public schools.
It would have been better if the
government of the United States had
acknowledged Jesus as Lord. Right.
Right? Um and it's not enough not to
have same-sex marriage. We should return
to you know, to laws against sodomy in
all 50 states. And there you are getting
towards a view of politics which
I think is closer to something called
theocracy. Mhm. But the degree seems to
me to make a great difference, right?
There there is a substantial difference
between saying
there are certain things that Christians
are against that the law should ban
Right.
>> and saying, actually no, there are many
more things that the law should ban lest
we offend God and to operationalize
that, you know, we need to enforce
the Ten Commandments through the law. Do
you think we should enforce all Ten
Commandments through public law in the
US?
>> yes, we should respect all Ten
Commandments. Okay. Then what about the
crimes themselves? What does it mean to
respect for a society to respect the Ten
Commandments in law. You've already said
that you would restore sodomy laws.
Would you have laws against adultery and
fornication? Yes.
Yes.
>> And and so someone an adulterer would
have to pay a fine and be publicly
flogged.
>> no. What I would what I would do and
basically This is unfortunate news for
the current president of the United
States. It's worth noting.
>> Well, and and for King David actually.
True enough. Uh so one of the things
that is important to note here is the
uh the nature of the the value of
prudence and uh
wise judgment as you seek to implement.
You don't find the magic breaker and
flip a switch and all of a sudden,
ta-da, Christian republic Right. with
you know, it just doesn't happen that
way. So what I would do on
adultery is I would get rid of no-fault
divorce. That that'd be the legal reform
I would institute. Um so no-fault
divorce has been a disaster and I think
was upstream from the sexual revolution.
Uh but there are there are many things
that we could do that would simply go
upstream and deal with sort of root
issues.
>> Right. But that but that works because
a married couple has
shared assets and you can, you know,
require payments of alimony and these
kind of things. What about fornication
or as the kids call it premarital sex,
right?
>> have you have two college students who
commit the sin of fornication. You're
not going to have one, you know, pay
alimony to the other. What does the law
do about that? Um
actually um earlier when you asked me
adultery and fornication, what I wanted
to do is split the two because adultery
they're not they're not in
>> Adultery is worse than fornication.
Adultery is far far worse than
fornication.
>> And in the Mosaic law, there wasn't
>> I also I know many people who will be
relieved to hear that as well.
Um
so and our goal is to relieve them,
right?
>> That's right.
So in Mosaic law, there is no express
penalty for fornication.
Okay? There is a penalty for marital
fraud. So so if a if a woman is
represent represents herself as a virgin
and she's not a virgin, then there was
civil consequences. But that had to do
with things like inheritance and who the
Mhm. who the father of the baby was and
all of that.
>> but so we're going easy on fornication.
Well, we're we're following the Bible.
Right.
>> Okay. So um So what I want to do is I
want to be a biblical
>> But we're not completely I mean
I at least in the discussion we just had
you did not advocate stoning adulterers,
right? No. So there is So there is some
you're deciding which particular aspects
of the Bible should apply. Well, yeah.
Right. There are there are biblical
precepts that allow for the stoning of
adulterers Yeah, correct. in the Old
Testament. And you're not you're not in
favor of stoning adulterers.
>> Well, I'm not against it either.
You're open you're open to it.
>> No. Uh
Now here's the this is the thing. Um
politics is the art of the possible. So
Yeah. All right. So one of the things
that people do is they
uh this is what um
the nice lady from CNN did with asking
me about women voting. We're we're we're
going to get to some of those questions
in a moment but go but go on, yeah. But
that's way down the that's way down the
road. I've got bigger fish to fry than
things like that. So if you ask me for
my ideal
theocratic republic um I would do I
would say I'm yeah, I'm willing to tell
you how I envision this. But I do it
remembering our discussion starting with
depravity where I believe that people
who think they're doing the will of God
need to check themselves and ideologues
who build utopias are a great
manufacturer of hellholes. I don't want
that. I want us to grow into it the way
Alfred did. So King Alfred brought the
laws of Deuteronomy, made them the laws
of England and that was the basis of
common law.
So he didn't just bring the content of
Mosaic law over. He brought the system
of precedent and case law. And what I
would I would much prefer to see an
Alfred approach where you take the
principles of the law, you apply them,
you stand by the principles and then
using
Christian prudence and wisdom um you
push in that direction until you get the
results that you want. You get to the
point where there there aren't any pride
parades and there aren't any drag queen
story hours. Okay, good.
What our society needs to do is say,
"This is normal sexuality. This is
wholesome. This is what we encourage. We
discourage We formally disapprove of
these activities." And you have laws
that would enable you to close down the
bathhouses.
But that's the kind of thing that I
>> How does that How does that then apply
to questions of religious practice?
Because there there too. So you've
you've said and argued I think that uh
you think that the first amendment of
the US Constitution would allow
for the US Congress to make a generic
profession of Christian belief. It just
wouldn't allow for them to establish a
reformed Christianity or Catholic
Christianity as the established church
of the US. Okay. So you're So you're in
a world where
Congress has made that kind of
profession. They've said Christ is king.
Um the Ten Commandments are up in
courthouses.
But you still have
one, obviously, a range of Christian
belief. You have plenty of non-Christian
belief. You have Jewish belief. You have
Muslim belief. You have Hindu belief.
You have Buddhist belief. And then you
have non-belief, right? And out of these
categories, some of them certainly
from your perspective fall afoul of some
of the first few commandments in the Ten
Commandments, right? So how does the law
of a moderate Christian theocracy This
is a
This is This is a This is a This
>> This is a horse and cart thing, okay?
Because there's no way that we're going
to get
a Christian republic and Congress
affirming
the Ten Commandments and the and
confessing that it is the
Senate and House released a statement
saying we believe Jesus rose from the
dead and the president signed it.
There's no way we're going to get to
that
that end result without a massive
reformation revival among the people
already. Right. So if I just tried to
superimpose that Christian theocracy on
the United States as it is now, then
I've got a monster problem in Dearborn,
Michigan with all the Muslims. I've got
I've got a monster problem there and it
would be a problem that I could not
solve. Because you can't jam the you
can't jam these things down in a
top-down way. It's got to be church
planting, evangelism, persuasion. And
when you Okay. So you've So you've done
all that
and
87% of the United States
are solid
you know, Westminster Confession
Calvinists. 80 87% You've You've
>> would be.
>> it. You've done it, right? But there is
still that unregenerate 13% of the
United States, some of whom, you know,
are papists, Catholics, and a lot of
whom are atheists, Muslims, Jews,
Hindus, and so on, right? And
all along the way through this process
of conversion seems perfectly reasonable
for people who hold those beliefs to
look at what's going on and say to you,
you know, once once we hit 87%, what
happens What happens to my liberties?
Yes.
>> Uh so I would say because I'm a Burkean
conservative, right? Um Uh-huh.
I'm skeptical, but go on. Yeah. I'm
really am. Burkean conservative, that
means that you you play with the hand
that you're dealt.
Okay, what are you working with? One of
the things that America America was
founded as a Protestant Christian
country. At At the founding we were 98%
Protestant every direction. There were
um one A lot of people didn't go to
church. Yeah, sure. A lot of a lot of
unregenerate people, including including
some people writing our founding
documents. But baptized baptized
Protestant, yes. But But um my the point
I was driving to is that there were
periods of reformation the Great
Awakening and the Second Great Awakening
and there was a great expansion of the
church in the 19th century.
Uh when it came to Protestant the
America kept her Protestant ethos
and incorporated successfully Catholics
and Jews. All right. I think that's
something that we know how to do. We've
done it before. It's been done, right?
And um
so I'm grateful for that. So I'm I'm not
trying to
reinvent anything. I'm trying to say
this is
I want to go back to where we were
getting a C plus. We were you know, we
were doing doing okay.
Right. It wasn't offensive to God that
there were these Catholics with their
icons and these Jews who didn't
acknowledge Jesus as Lordship.
>> There's a difference between
a sin and a crime.
Okay? I That with that I agree.
>> Okay. And one of the one of the big
problems that
budding theocrats have had is an
inability to distinguish sins and
crimes. Um and that was something that
tripped up the Puritan interregnum
in England after the English Civil Civil
War. Um and basically someone says, "Oh,
I've got this system of doctrine and
everything that's in the Bible that I
think that the that God doesn't like, we
have to make a law, right?" So I call
myself a theocratic libertarian. And the
theocratic means
we if we outlaw something, I want a
Bible ver I want Bible, ideally a Ten
Commandments, if we make something
against the law. Right. But if it has to
do with the manufacturing sale of
widgets or the thoughts a person thinks
or the beliefs that they have, I'm a
libertarian. So you're a libertarian on
how people worship, but you're not a
libertarian on who they sleep with.
Is that Is that right?
>> Um yes. But couldn't you argue it in
reverse that maybe
God cares more about how you worship
than whether you've committed a
particular sexual sin? I do believe that
God cares more about how we worship. I
do believe that's the first table of the
law. Yeah, it starts It starts with
that. It ends with adultery, but it
starts with worship.
>> But the fact that God cares more about
that does not mean that we are competent
to deal with all the ins and outs of it.
So
for example, Paul says that greed is
idolatry. Um but I don't want
covetousness police.
You know, I don't want There's certain
things that the civil magistrate cannot
do.
>> Why is it easier for the civil
magistrate to, you know,
arrest people for sexual crimes than it
would be for them to arrest them for
other other sins? Just because it's Just
because it's a more concrete act.
>> Yeah, the jealous wife has evidence. I'm
I'm curious cuz I cuz it seems to me
that someone who wanted to, let's say,
do a skeptical read of your view would
be that, you know, in the current
climate
um you feel like you have an affinity
for Catholics like me and even some
affinity for monotheists who, you know,
don't accept the gospel. Right. Um and
you want us to like you and feel like
we're on the same team. And you don't
feel that way about, let's say,
feminists, gay people, um and so you'll
say, "Well, of course in the theocratic
republic we'll leave the Catholics
alone,
but we'll arrest some people committing
sodomy. But in your heart
you might want to arrest the Catholics,
too." No. No.
No.
Okay. Okay.
>> I'm I'm just I'm just raising that
possibility.
>> So let me This is something that
Switzerland did, okay?
Um and this may be illustrate the what
you're getting at here. Um in my
biblical republic,
if Muslims were here, not citizens but
residents, they were traveling merchants
and whatever, and you had a number of
Muslims in the same town, and they
wanted to get together and pray
together, would that be a problem? No.
Would they be allowed to build a
minaret? No.
Church bells Church bells, yes. Yep.
Minaret, no. Um so But synagogues, yes.
Yes, but they're not they're not trying
to own the public space by
um Mhm. by the by the
>> Okay. Okay. So the emphasis is right. So
basically the society would acknowledge
that Jesus rose from the dead. And
again, this is down the road This is my
500 years from now.
Um we'd acknowledge that Jesus is Lord
and we would say this is a Protestant
Christian country and we have worked out
We have successfully worked out how to
relate to Catholics and Jews. We have a
long history of that. We do not know how
to
take um 3 million
um
Muslims who want to live under Sharia
law and put them in the middle of
Michigan. We don't have We We don't have
the mechanism or the wisdom
>> think most American Muslims right now
want to live under Sharia law? Uh the
ones in Dearborn
Okay, we'll we'll table that as a
debatable point. I'm going to repeat the
question. Do you think most American
Muslims right now want to live under
Sharia law? I would say the Muslims who
come here to assimilate mhm
are coming to assimilate to a Christian
country. And I have no objection Aren't
they coming to assimilate to a country
that has fallen away from Christianity
and is engaged in all kinds of public
debauchery? No, I have talking about my
ideal republic.
Okay.
Right.
>> All right, so
>> All right. Um so basically we've we've
painted ourselves into a bad corner.
America is a regular country like other
countries and regular countries have
borders and if you assimilate at too
rapid a rate, any kind of alien
worldview, you're going to have trouble.
I I believe that Muslims and Hindus
could be assimilated in an ideal
republic at decent rates of speed and
that assimilation would be hand in glove
with evangelization and you because
people would be coming to be to fit into
this Christian society.
>> Mhm. But if right now they're not
they're coming in um as in a parasitic
way, I believe, to devour
a
rotting empire. And and be and that's
because we don't know who we are, we
don't know what we stand for, we don't
know what we think and so consequently
um
you've got that 90-ft tall Hindu statue
in Texas.
>> Right. And
>> That should be illegal in your view. Oh
yeah, yeah. Well, I think that sort sort
of thing there shouldn't even have to be
a law. Right.
>> Right. Um there was no law if if you go
back to 1945
America There was no law then against
building
>> And it was unthinkable then. Well.
Right. Right. It So that's my point.
There are a number of things
>> if you look at 19th century American
history honestly
while there were not large numbers of
Hindus, I think a lot of very strange
religious experiments were quite
thinkable and that America has
always had
a certain kind of room for whatever the
equivalent of building
>> Yeah. America's always had room for
religious weirdos.
>> Yes. And and the 19th century
>> Present company and I I I include myself
in this very much included. But 19th
19th century America was a monkey house
of communes and different things. That's
all true. But the 90-ft statue, those
sorts of things are taunts. There it's
not here's our free we're just trying to
worship in our own quiet little way.
It's it's sort of
I wonder how far we can push this before
somebody says something.
>> Okay. Okay, so there's a no taunting the
Christian majority Right. soft soft
policy. Let's talk about women for a
moment. Yes.
>> I've been pressing you on what would be
forbidden.
Uh
both on a shorter timeline and in the
500-year path to the Calvinist republic.
Let's talk about what would be
permitted. Um
your
theology takes a fairly not fairly, it
takes a straightforwardly patriarchal
view of the family, of male headship.
This is obviously drawing on some fairly
explicit things in the New Testament.
It's not you're not you know, pulling it
pulling it out of the ether.
Um
but there is a set of questions about
what
that implies for women's participation
in society. And you mentioned earlier a
CNN interview you did
which asked about women voting and you
said ideally uh in families Households
for
>> Households Households would cast a vote
and the decider would be the husband.
>> Right. Uh single women would if they if
they were heads of household would have
a right would have a right to vote.
>> Right. Um
So
what else would be permitted to husbands
in their exercise of patriarchal
authority? Would they would have the
right to control and dispose of
property? Of their wives' property, I
mean.
>> I would say um actually no. Uh I
um
I appreciate
uh and would defend the old Christian
practice of endowing the wife in a
biblical
>> the husband in spite of being head of
the household would not have access to
that money.
>> Yeah, that was hers. So ba- basically
uh I believe that
it would be wise and prudent for us to
have a system of um
endowment for the wife
>> Mhm. that would mean that if a husband
just thought he found someone cuter
he would take a serious financial hit.
Um
what about discipline in the household?
Do you think that husbands as heads of
household should be again permitted
under the law to use forms of physical
coercion? Absolutely. Of of the wife?
>> Of the wife. No, absolutely not.
>> Okay. Now
call the cops.
No physical coercion whatsoever. No.
Okay. So these these are
Go go ahead. So
um
basically as a pastor I've seen all
kinds of things and uh
marital problems can get pretty messy
pretty tangled pretty quickly. But I
believe that um the husband does not
have the authority legally to exercise
any kind of corporal discipline of his
wife. No, absolutely not. Now, um
what do you have what happens when the
cops are called because there's a
domestic thing and Mhm. and he hit her
but she'd been hitting him for 5 minutes
but you know, you've got those sorts of
situations. But um the Islamic idea of
a husband beating his wife and it's
okay, it's just simply not okay. But
it's not only an Islamic idea. Like if
you look at the history of the Christian
West, you have situations where one, the
law has given the husband pretty much
total control over the property of his
wife for reasons of headship and
patriarchal authority and at least
cultures where it is customary to sort
of
accept or wink at
um yeah, sort of the use of physical
force by husbands against wives.
>> Yeah, I would
>> So it seems like
>> say it in our church. Basically if any
husband and
we're patri- like you said, we're
patriarchal and
I can envision someone moving to Moscow
because I think they're patriarchal and
that must line up with my idea of
patriarchy
>> he if someone like that joined our
church and we found out that he was
beating his wife, he would be
excommunicated. We would we would put
him under discipline. So let me put it
to you and
I suspect you'll dispute this but I'll
I'll put it to you that this seems like
a situation where
a Christian culture can learn something
from the experience of the liberal era,
more secular era, a more feminist era in
terms of what it's willing to accept and
what it's not. Mhm. Right? That there is
a way in which it seems like
you know, in saying no, I wouldn't
accept that and no, I wouldn't accept
that.
>> Mhm. Again, things that many Christians
accepted in the past you are accepting
to some degree that
if we pass out of this more secular era
into a more Christian era, we will look
back and say, well,
it was bad that we lost the faith and
good that we recovered it but it was
also good that in the course of the 20th
century we decided that it was rotten
for husbands to beat their wives and
maybe a good idea for wives to control
some of their own property. Would that
be fair? Yeah, I think wives controlling
their own property is an ancient custom
among Christians but
to No, I'm not I'm not and I I'm not
arguing that all Christians everywhere
Right.
>> supported wife beating or anything
remotely like that. I am saying that
there is a particular
20th century shift
>> Yeah.
>> around these issues
>> Yeah, so that is that is driven by what
are seen as liberal and feminist
concerns. Yeah, I wouldn't I wouldn't
call them liberal and feminist but I'd
say there are certain Western
developments that I like that I like
>> Okay. right? And the way I've put this
same issue is is I've been arguing for a
mere Christendom or Christendom 2.0.
Okay? Uh
Christendom 1.0 had some bugs in it. I
don't want a rerun of Christendom 1.0.
Don't want that. Uh the Christians
screwed it up in different areas. So
nobody expects the Spanish Inquisition
as Monty Python taught us. Um and I
don't want the Spanish Inquisition
again. Okay? I want a Christendom that
learns lessons from history and some of
those lessons that you learn from
history
maybe okay that the person who wrote
that book or did influence this
legislation or they may have been a
feminist or liberal or whatever
whatever. Um what's important is whether
it's just and prudent and right. And if
it if it is and and it aligns with the
Bible, then I'm more than happy to to go
with it.
So just to take a related example, one
of the controversies of many
>> Yes.
>> been mixed up in Right.
>> has to do with slavery Right.
>> and whether slavery is absolutely
forbidden by the Bible, absolutely
forbidden to Christians or whether it is
critiqued but allowed for. Right. Um and
you think it is critiqued but allowed
for. Right. Uh
on this on a straightforward reading of
the New Testament, I would agree with
you.
>> Right.
>> I would say pretty clearly there is a
you know, there is a a pretty clear path
from the message of the Bible to the
abolition of slavery but there is no
moment Right.
>> in the New Testament when Jesus and
Jesus insists on the manumission of
slaves. Paul says slaves obey your
masters in the Lord.
>> Right. Um So I think I think it's true
that the Bible alone does not say an
absolute no to slavery.
>> Right. But I also think that it is
possible for Christians to develop their
thinking in ways that are rooted in
scripture that lead to the statement no,
this is this should be absolutely
forbidden. But I would say not only
leads to it, but necessarily leads to
it.
So, I believe the logic of scripture,
which
you preach the gospel, you're preaching
the gospel of liberty, and you can't
preach the gospel of liberty to
centuries of clanking chains. Right? The
The gospel brings liberty. So, the issue
The issue there is, what do you do in
the middle of a pagan slave-owning
society? Paul didn't arrive in Rome and
start circulating petitions about
slavery. He was playing the long game,
and he
taught masters and slaves how to treat
one another. And so,
that I I believe that the logic of the
gospel necessarily overturns
institutions like slavery.
I think it's fine for us to impose our
moral I'm glad that slavery is gone and
good riddance. So, I'm glad that slavery
is I'm glad that it's forbidden in the
law.
But I guess I guess what I'm driving at
is that
>> there are things in the experience of
history which
you know, as a Calvinist, you think is a
story being written by God
>> yes.
>> that teach us certain things, right? And
it seems like a lot of a lot of people
in the 21st century, looking back at
those bugs in the software Right. of
Christendom, would say is that, you
know, one of the lessons that we can
learn from the wars of religion or the
Spanish Inquisition or anything else,
right? Is that Christians should be
very, very careful about trying to um
sort of suppress wrong belief and
over-criminalize
sin.
And I guess you would say that's right,
but you can go pretty far.
>> Yeah. And I would say, seems like you're
going way too far and under-learning
under-learning the actual lessons.
>> aren't you wanting to criminalize
slavery? I am wanting to criminalize
slavery.
>> You're the one wanting to the one
wanting to criminalize slavery.
>> that's a fair that's a fair comeback.
Yes.
Um
but what I'm arguing is that the reason
that Christians now think that we should
abolish slavery wherever we find it is
not simply based on a straightforward
reading of the New Testament. It's based
on the experience of being Christians in
history. And part of the reason that
people
secular liberals and many Christians as
well react so strongly when you say,
"Well, I'm not for or against stoning
adulterers." is that
independent of what Jesus did when
people wanted to stone a woman
independent of that, one of the lessons
that most people in 21st century America
take from the last 500 years of
experience is that there's lots of
things that Christian republics have
done that God passed judgment on. Right.
Which is why maybe why we have a more
secular society. And it seems like you
want to bring maybe a few too many of
those things that God already judged and
found wanting back. Okay. What I want to
do is one slavery is what I I don't want
to bring any of that back.
>> No, I'm not I'm not accusing you of
wanting to bring back slavery, but you
do want to bring back certain penalties
and restrictions and attempts to again,
to use the distinction you yourself used
to sort of to sort of regulate sin
through the law. Now, one of One One of
the things I I want to do is say
I'm really glad that slavery's gone and
good riddance. And I want to say that
the southern slave owner who read the
book of Ephesians
and Colossians and 1 Timothy and treated
his slaves decently, remembering that he
had a master in heaven who studiously
tried to obey what Paul said slave
owners were supposed to do. I would say
he was not an orc. And he is the reason
part of the reason why slavery ended.
Right? In other words, I would say he's
a he's a good guy. There were horrific
slave owners that that treated their
slaves every bit as badly as the
abolitionists said, but there were also
decent human beings who were muddling
along in a corrupt and
uh uh fallible human institution.
Basically, what I want to do is agree
with you about the part where the
kingdom of God is like yeast that is
dropped into the loaf, and it gradually
works through the whole loaf,
permeating the whole. So, when Paul
preached the gospel in Rome, the
gladiatorial games didn't end the
following week. It would took centuries,
but the yeast worked through the loaf
such that the gladiatorial games were
ended eventually, slavery was ended
eventually, concubinage was ended
eventually. All of which was good gospel
progress and postmillennial.
That's That's the way it That's the way
it works. So, um But isn't But can't
part of that gospel progress under the
sovereignty of God
be having certain societies, and we'll
say Catholicism under the Inquisition,
for God to say, "This goes too far. It
imposes too much. It becomes too
tyrannical, and therefore I will pass
judgment on it. And if you, Doug Wilson,
want to bring those things back, you are
making a mistake as a Christian because
God has already said that you know,
again, to take an example, that imposing
sodomy laws on all 50 states was, you
know, whatever you think of the morality
of same-sex behavior was a mistake.
Right. So, here's This is the thing that
I'm uh
want to drive at. First, I'm willing to
grant the in principle that if someone
comes to me with an open Bible and an
open history book, and he says, "Doug, I
think you ought to rethink your views on
penal
codes for
homosexuality or whatever. As Let's have
a Bible study." I'd say, "I'm open.
Let's have a Bible study." I'm really
open to that. I don't want I don't want
to take my
any guidance at all from the secular
society around us. And the reason I
don't is they killed 60 million babies.
I don't want to hear any moral lectures
from these people about slavery.
You were You
You were better off being a black person
in Charleston, South Carolina in 1850
when they had an operating slave market
than being conceived as a black baby in
New York City or Baltimore today.
And And so, consequently, the thing I
don't want to admit
>> Just to clarify
what you're saying, you're saying you
were better off being a slave than being
aborted in the womb. Correct.
>> Yeah. Better off being Better off being
allowed to live as a slave than to be
chopped up That that So, basically, the
thing that I The thing that just gets my
motor running is the idea that we are
some sort of moral exemplars that get to
judge other societies. So, I want I do
want
>> But can't I mean
Let me agree Let me agree with you. I
want to I want to agree with you here.
>> Okay. Because I really do want
Christendom 2.0
to have learned the lessons of being
criminalizing things that were sins, not
crimes,
being officious,
Cromwell's men
prowling the streets of London trying to
smell who was having
>> Banning Banning Christmas Christmas
dinners. Yes, yes.
Yeah, that that kind of officiousness is
not what I I want at all. Um but it
neither do I want
any of our reforms to be based on the
universal rights of man. So, if there
are things I I read books by feminists,
and and I want to be able to learn from
anybody. My point is I don't want to
have anything based on the the false
doctrines that that they're espousing. I
want everything that I teach to be
consistent with the Bible and to be
derived from the Bible. I want to be
able to make a biblical case for it.
Right, but couldn't you also say that
parts of you know, idea modern liberal
ideas about human rights and parts of
modern feminist ideas about the equality
of men and women are themselves, you
know, in a context where liberal society
descends from Christian society,
connected to scripture itself, right?
What I don't I don't see why you have to
separate it out and say, "Well, I don't
want, you know, I don't want to just
draw on feminist principles." Some
feminist principles can be Christian
principles, can't they? Yeah. There's
The Venn diagram The Venn diagrams can
overlap.
>> Okay. Yes, but they can also be wildly
divergent.
>> Yes. No, I I I completely agree.
Let's talk about your influence for a
moment.
You're not going to call me an
influencer, are you?
>> I am. Actually, I I With With apologies.
Better than calling you a thought
leader, the ultimate insult.
I think, as you can probably tell, I
find this a very, very interesting
conversation. I can tell.
I had some uncertainty about whether it
made sense to invite you Right.
>> to have the conversation.
>> Understandable. Because No, no, not not
because not because of the extremity of
your perspective, but because for as
long as I've been
writing about American Christianity,
there has been a habit for liberal
critics of conservative Christianity to
elevate figures who seem to have extreme
views, who will
describe themselves as theocratic,
right? And say, "This person is
influential. This person shows where
religious conservatism Right.
>> is going, right?" And you've been
getting a certain amount of tension
Sorry. You've been getting a certain
amount of attention in the second Trump
presidency. Uh but a lot of it has taken
that form of people saying, "Look how
bad religious conservatism is. Look at
this awful theocrat, Doug Wilson."
Right.
How influential are you?
Um more influential than I used to be.
Um
and at significant
significant higher levels.
Um but
and this is all
>> That answer will make my producers very
happy. About the booking decisions we've
made. Go on.
>> So, um our community of churches and
this is all you asked me directly Yeah.
And I don't want to be tooting my own
horn. So, this is just
uh what's the way I see it. Um our
church community in Moscow has doubled.
Um people we were for a couple years
there pretty much every Sunday at church
I'd meet someone who would say, "Well,
we're here now."
Uh and they were chased there by blue
state governors or by pastors and elders
who flaked on them. They didn't have the
Christian leadership they thought they
had. You know, there's just a lot of
things that have contributed uh to that.
>> And just just to give people a sense,
just describe the community Okay.
again briefly that you built in Moscow.
Moscow Moscow not Moscow. Moscow in
Moscow, Idaho. So, Moscow, Idaho is
about 25,000 people. It's a university
town. It's 8 miles away from Pullman,
Washington, another university town. WSU
and you have University of Idaho are
8 miles apart. And
uh we are our community of churches is
now about 3,000 people. Which is about
10% of the population. So, it's a
significant
um part of the local population.
Because we were under embargo
from sort of more respectable
evangelical outlets or publishers or
whatnot. We were sort of forced into the
position of building our own platforms.
Uh
I edited a magazine for 20 years,
Credenda Agenda. Publishing our
started our own publishing house. Um
that publishing house has a um
streaming service Canon Plus. Um and
that has sort of accumulated
mountains of content which has started
to
get traction around the country. Um and
I've written a number of books, some of
which have got made their way by various
means to people of
influence and and uh in important
places. So,
the reach
the reach is significant. Now, and and
also the time in which we're saying
these things is different. So, 20 years
ago Interesting times.
>> Interesting Yes, interesting times.
Italicized interesting times. Uh 20
years ago, I was saying many of these
same things. And people the reaction of
a normie, let's say, normies and
grillers
that go to church on Sunday and then
Right. And they they grill and they're
happy in American suburbia. Right. And
they don't think much about how biblical
stoning precepts should be applied.
>> Yeah, and they listen to me talk about
something and they go, "Jeepers. You
know, good grief. Where do they
send him send him back somebody?" And
what what happened in the last 5 years
is virtually every respected institution
in the United States disgraced itself.
You know, the health industry, the
military, the Supreme Court, Congress,
uh
everybody face-planted. Boom. And
and that what that left is a lot of
normies are were gawksmacked saying,
"What happened to the America I grew up
in? Every everything blew up." Nobody's
making sense. They're all
you know, and it's uh
it's clown world.
And and then they went and we're still
talking and we're we got our platform
and they that doesn't sound nearly as
radical as all the respectable types. In
fact in fact 20 years ago, Wilson was
predicting this. Was saying that we were
we were in free fall and this is where
we were going to land. Right. And so, we
have garnered a lot of attention um for
that reason. Um now, that's one piece of
it. The other piece of it and this is um
I well, I'll just say it. I was
I'll just say it.
>> Um
I
I've met Pete Hegseth once, one time.
So, I've written a lot on education. We
planted a classical Christian school.
There are hundreds of classical
Christian schools around the country now
that are following that model.
Um and
uh David Goodwin who is the head of
ACCS, Association of classical Christian
schools is a friend of mine. And Pete
Hegseth did a Fox News thing on
education, met David Goodwin. They wound
up writing The Battle for the American
Mind together. And so, Hegseth knew
about me from all the stuff I'd done on
education. And then he moved to
Nashville um to any in order to put his
kids in a classical Christian school
unrelated unconnected to me.
And I was in Nashville and preached at
um
the church that he had joined. All
independent of me, but that that church
is in our denomination. So, there's a
maybe 150 to 170 churches in the
denomination I started. And
I met him one time at church. And a
pleasant exchange. He knew who I was, I
knew who he was and we met at church.
Um and then one other time I met Russ
Vought
head of the Office of Management and
Budget.
I met him one time. We were on a panel
discussion here in DC. And then a few
months ago I was talking to a reporter
who called me
um and she was asking, "Well, you're
coming to Washington, DC. Are you going
to be meeting with influential people?"
And I said, "Well, you guys mostly."
Right. Uh AP and Politica Politico and
this and but this is all downstream of
what I call assuming the center. So, if
you speak we we live in confused and
confusing times.
And whatever else you say about us, it's
a consistent message that we understand
and we've been articulating for decades.
And people like
that kind of direction and that they
like that. But it's also it's also
spoken into a world where the
institutional failure that you were
describing extends to most Christian
churches. Yeah.
It's part of it. Yes.
>> and and you are in certain ways as
Christianity has shrunk, as the practice
of Christianity has declined in the
United States,
communities like yours, you know,
effectively become
bigger fish in that in that smaller
pond.
>> That's correct.
>> Right. So, it is it's both that there
are people sort of confused and baffled
and dismayed by the world who who find
sort of the consistency of your
perspective appealing. But then it's
also
and I see this in my own life and
interaction with fellow Christians. It's
people inside Christianity
who feel sort of beleaguered and
defeated and you know, and then here's
this guy
Doug Wilson and he's willing to you
know, come on a New York Times podcast
and say Right? He's he's just
you know, he's just
He's just well well, look No, no, I mean
don't don't don't act demure. You have
an entire style. Right? You know, and
and you have defended this style at
length where you know, that that says
basically that it is perfectly Christian
to speak you know, the language of
insult to call people um I just wrote
down a few, lumberjack dykes,
small-breasted biddies, gaytards and
then some other phrases that I'm not
going to use on a podcast.
>> Right. Like this one, right?
>> And that's
that's part of the appeal, too, right?
It is
>> That's correct. You are in in your own
distinctive way
very online
and speaking some of the language of
that of that kind of world. Yes.
Do you Do you want me to defend it?
I I'm not I'm not trying to be uh
politically incorrect for the sake of
being politically incorrect. And I'm not
using the the language that you referred
to. I'm not resorting to that kind of
language because I want to be
an ecclesiastical Howard Stern or or
some sort of shock jock.
>> That actually was in my notes. I'm not
I'm not joking the Howard Stern the
Howard Stern comparison.
>> Um yeah.
So, what what I'm doing when I use I'm a
um
I'm a wordsmith. I write a lot. I use
words. And when I take certain words out
with sharp pointy edge or a blade, it's
a weapon to be used in a particular
situation for a particular purpose in a
particular time. It's not for the
you know, he said a naughty word. That's
not Right. But don't you think some of
your fans take it that way? Yes. Yeah,
but that this is a problem with mass
communication of any sort. Right. So, if
you if you write for 10,000 people, um
somebody's going to misunderstand what
you're saying or what you're doing or
what you're or what you're up to. And it
is true that
the language that I've used
occasionally. So, I've I've written
millions of words. And you can go
through and pick out all the jalapenos
and you can make them into a jalapeno
paste and you can put them all on the
one cracker and get a completely
different effect than what is happening
in real time in these real battles. I'll
ask a related a related question
which is that you aren't the only person
who people find appealing because you're
seen as sort of speaking forthrightly
and saying politically incorrect things
and using the words the libs don't want
you to use, right? You share that space
with people who also call themselves
Christian nationalists, right? For whom
that does mean a white nationalism or an
anti-Semitic nationalism, right? And one
of the I think one of the interesting
things that listeners should be aware of
is that in addition to your wars against
the secular liberals and milk-toast
Christians and so on, lately you've also
been engaged in this kind of extended
conflict with people who want a sort of
formally racialized form of
Christianity.
That was actually my first internet
controversy many years ago was with the
Kenites,
white identitarians and and I call them
skinists. And I've been in polemical
firefights with
anti-Semites and
people who have massage actual
massageists, not people who are accused
of being that way. Do you Do you think
you're going to win that fight? I do.
Because one of the
one of the things that has tended to
happen in the recent past, the 20th
century past, right? Is that when you
have periods of
liberal weakness or liberal collapse,
there are forms of conservative religion
that try and fill that void, but there
are also consistently forms of
identitarian politics, racist politics,
fascist politics that fill that void and
you can see versions of this obviously
in 1930s Europe. Um and I'm not sure
that the record of the 20th century
proves that
in the battle to define post-liberalism,
it's guaranteed that the you know, the
colorblind Calvinists
are are coming. Well, I mean
Again, we may not win, but we're going
to go down fighting and that matters
because we're Bible people.
In other words, I want to fight against
racial vain glory, ethnic vain glory, or
ethnic malice because the Bible
prohibits it.
In Christ is neither Jew nor Greek,
slave free, Scythian and Colossians or
barbarian,
and it's one of the central centerpieces
of the New Testament.
I believe that Christian pastors should
fight and they should fight sin.
And it's not just sin on the left, it's
not just the progressive
leftism, it's also I call it the dank
right. And then there people who say
that they have no enemies to the right,
but that's just telling the devil what
direction to attack you from. Well, and
this is but this is also this will be my
last, maybe my last attempt in my
crusade to get you to say something nice
about liberalism, right? But it does
seem like some of these forces on the
dank right that you're talking about,
racists and anti-Semites and so on, that
that that has been kept at bay in part
by the same society that you were
condemning in no uncertain terms earlier
in the conversation for abortion and
other sins.
And it seems to me that that that itself
should
make you think, you know, yes, there are
particular sins and particular evils
that are you know, that are part of the
liberal moment or the late 20th, early
21st century America and Christians
should condemn them.
But there are but every society has
particular sins. And it should be
possible for even a Christian theocrat
to say
maybe liberalism did an okay job
suppressing racism and anti-Semitism
even as it was doing some other bad
things. No, I grant the point in
principle that is I don't believe that
classical liberalism gets everything
wrong and I really don't believe that
and I enjoyed very much the country I
grew up in and I I received many
benefits from that era. So that point's
granted, but on the dank right,
I I believe that the liberal treatment
of young white males has been one of the
causes for this recoil and eruption. So
what you had was a bad toxic combination
of a bad economy,
of young men being told repeatedly that
they are the cancer of the planet, that
their masculinity is toxic, that their
their skin is the the blight of the the
world and their heterosexuality is a
hate crime, you know, just and they've
been kicked in the head for years and
years and years and they they took it
ill. And then when you combine it with
no economic opportunities and all of the
all the Trumpian issues, you combine it,
they got pretty surly and erupted. And
I'm just interjecting I'm expecting a
good bit of it to go away. I there's a
big if here.
If there's a Trump boom
economic boom,
I don't know that there will be, but if
there is one, if his presidency is
considered a successful one and there's
economic breathing room that's created,
I think a lot of this goes away. I think
a lot of the churn is economic
frustration, no opportunities, and who
do we blame? Well, there's always Jews.
We can always we can always blame the
Jews. But in the meantime, it's I'm just
explaining how that came about, not
defending it. It still needs to be
attacked, it still needs to be rebuked.
>> Right. And and here I'm going to try and
pull us pull us towards our conclusion
by
going back towards where we began and
reminding you that everything you just
deplored that progressives and liberals
did unkindly to white men obviously
happened for the greater glory of God,
right?
Right? Like all things that happen,
which yields
a kind of big a big a big picture
picture question that I I'd like to get
your reflection on, which is from the
point of view of the non-Calvinist.
It seems like the Calvinist perspective
on history that it's it's not just in
God's hands in a general way,
it's in God's hands in this absolute
way, right? Down to the minutia. It
seems like that could yield a kind of
political quietism that Christians
shouldn't sully themselves with
politics. Why would you you know, bother
try Why would you bother trying to use
the state to punish adulterers or
anybody else when God decided whether
they were going to commit adultery in
the first place, right? But obviously
that's not true because every time you
get a Calvinist surge in Western life
there's an activist surge.
>> activist component and I know that
you're a moderate theocrat compared to
Calvin's Geneva or Puritan New England,
but you are still willing to own that
that label. So tell me, why does a
belief in predestination
and divine sovereignty, this profound
divine sovereignty, yield this
activist, at least somewhat theocratic
form of politics where you're trying to
build the Christian Republic? Right.
Because the sovereign God tells us to.
So it's not just
God Well, that's right. Okay, yes. No,
that's that's right. God decided. God
decided, but he he didn't just give us
the world, he gave us
the the manual, the user's manual in his
word. And in that manual, it tells us to
feed the hungry. It tells us to pure and
undefiled religion is this to visit
widows and orphans in their affliction.
We're we're told to be activists. So if
I if I said because God foreordains
everything, I'm going to just sit here
on the couch, then what I'm doing is I'm
disobeying the sovereign God who that I
that I say that I believe in.
>> Okay, but but the sovereign God in the
New Testament
says, go and make disciples of all
nations.
>> Yes. He does not say go and build a
Christian Republic.
Um That that is that is a second-order
implication that you are drawing from
the Great Commission.
>> Disciple all the nations
baptizing them,
teaching them to obey all that I've
commanded. And
that the Christian nationalism is third
in that lineup. You disciple the
nations, you preach the gospel, you
baptize them, and then down the road
when you you know, the the king or the
emperor says
Right. You also
render unto Caesar, right? You also
respect
for the time being secular civil pagan
authorities. And there is a conspicuous
absence in the New Testament. I agree
that there there's a presence in
Deuteronomy, there's a presence in the
Old Testament, but there's a conspicuous
absence of anything like Sharia law,
anything like a blueprint for the for
the Christian Republic. And yet
Calvinists in particular are are drawn
there, right? But but we have the Old
Testament. It's not just it's not just
starting from scratch with the New
Testament and Calvinists historically
have been embedded in
immersed in Old Testament teaching. And
in Christian common law, Christian
political theory, there's a great deal
of
dependence on Old Old Testament.
But um
Okay, I'm going to act like a liberal
though and psychologize this for a
moment.
Have you ever read God owes us nothing
by Leszek Kołakowski?
No. It's a book he's a Polish
philosopher, but it's a book about
essentially the Calvinist form of
Catholicism, Jansenism in in France,
right? So this is associated with Blaise
Pascal, mathematician and philosopher,
right? So he's writing about Jansenism.
And he compares the zeal of the
Jansenists to the zeal of 20th century
communists who also believed in a kind
of predestination. Communists thought,
you know, the dialectic of history made
it inevitable that their revolution
would win and yet they worked extra
hard. Right? And if you work extra hard,
you can prove to yourself that you were
predestined right for glory or for, you
know, the workers' paradise all along,
right? And it seems to me as a Catholic
that that speaks to the genuine strength
that Calvinism has generated really
interesting and dynamic societies. Yeah.
For a short period of time, but then it
burns out. And as a Catholic, I look at
that story and I say, "Look, here's a,
you know, here's a man, Doug Wilson, he
comes to me and he says, 'Good news.
Um, you know, the knowledge of God is
going to cover the world. We're going to
have billions of Christians, Christians
beyond number.' That's right. And by the
way, the institution that's going to do
this is a increasingly influential, but,
you know, pretty small-scale set of
Calvinist institutions that conveniently
you yourself helped found in Idaho. And
and I'm sitting here and I'm a member of
a church that has, you know, give or
take 1.3 billion
Catholic Christians spread around the
world.
And it seems to me that like
maybe
if you want the conversion of the world,
why don't you swallow your pride and
come on over the Tiber to us?
>> That's right. So,
thank you for the invitation.
>> You're I mean, I I, you know, it's it's
a necessary part part of this kind of
conversation.
>> not expecting the altar call, but
thank you for it. Um, the the thing I
would point out is the Christian church
is 2,000 years old. The Protestant
Reformation as a distinct thing
uh has been in existence for 25% of the
church's history. Mhm. Right. So, and in
the course of that time, the Protestants
with Calvinists at the center of it have
built a very great civilization.
And it is a United States of America.
>> Well, no, the civilization would be I
would say, roughly speaking,
um the European uh all the countries
that have
>> we're getting some stolen valor here,
Doug.
>> Uh yeah, yeah, yeah, wait, wait. Um,
hear me out.
I'm I'm um so, basically, if you made a
map got a map of the world and you put
colored in all the countries that had a
significant Reformation heritage.
Okay. Um, Netherlands, Great Britain,
you know, United States, Australia,
South Africa, you know, you you have the
you color them in. You're looking pretty
much at the first world.
All right. You're
um and I don't think that's
coincidental. It's not a stolen valor
thing to say, "You guys Yeah, you guys
guys got Dante. We've got Bach." You
know, they're
I Well, no, I don't think it's stolen
valor to say that Protestantism and
Calvinist Protestantism in particular
played an essential role in the building
of the modern world. I don't think it's
at all false to say that through
Protestantism various important
critiques and correctives to medieval
Catholicism entered the world.
Um, I also don't think that it's that
it's wrong to say that some of the
things I've been defending to you about
liberalism in this conversation come out
of the Protestant inheritance. I'm from
New England. My ancestors include
various congregationalist ministers,
right? And I would be a poor you know,
descendant of those people if I just
said, you know, everything they did was
outside outside of God's plan. I don't
think it was, but I do think that what
you see
in those last 500 years of history,
right, is that
Calvinism burns brightly as a movement
of moral reform and correction, but when
it burns out, it yields the landscape
that you yourself are sitting here
deploring, right? In the United States,
the great Calvinist institutions like my
own alma mater, Harvard University, are
now, you know, the heartbeat of woke
woke city, right? And so, I guess yeah,
my my last appeal to you is to consider
that, you know,
in the fun that you plainly have in sort
of pushing toward Puritan New England
and saying, "Maybe we'll, you know, love
the stocks. Maybe we'll stone some
adulterers and so on."
You are setting in motion the same cycle
where people come to you because you
offer a zealous and intense form of
Christianity, but the zeal gets out of
hand
and the hangover is wicked. Right. So, I
can agree with much of that. Cotton
Mather, just quoted a New Englander,
said, "Faithfulness begat prosperity and
the daughter devoured the mother."
So, what what happens as I I believe as
a historical fact that in times of
affliction and hardship and 9 mi of bad
road, Calvinists generally shine. And I
also believe that there's a blessing
that comes from that and the blessing
frequently devours them.
So, it's it's like a you So, yeah, the
warning is well taken. So, we are in our
current mode. We're building. We're
founding. We're establishing. We're
doing, you know, we're doing all that.
So, we're in that mode.
How will our How will our
great-grandchildren do?
I've I'm a great-grandfather now and
when when those kids are 25 years old,
how much of what we have done will they
take for granted? The the transition
from generation to generation is always
the challenge and because Calvinists
have been so successful and they work so
hard, they oftentimes leave, bequeath
substantial resources to their
grandchildren and great-grandchildren.
And as it says in Deuteronomy, Jeshurun
waxed fat and kicked.
But maybe if in that work
they restrain themselves slightly from
certain excesses of zeal and
intolerance, they might be so fortunate
as to see their great-grandchildren
become not secularists, but merely Roman
Catholics.
>> but here's the good news. I am holding
back.
All right. On that note, Doug Wilson,
thank you for joining me.
>> Thank you.